---
layout: post
title: Verbs, 1st Declension & Present Tense.
description: "Verbs! Made Easily (hopefully)"
modified: 2015-01-17
---

In Latin, the subject (who or what is doing the action) is determined by its ending. The person and number of a verb tells us who the subject is, and how many of them there are. 

For example:

* If the verb is in first person,  then **I** am the subject.
* In the second person, **you** are the subject.
* In the third person, **someone else** is the subject.
If the verb is singular, there is only one subject. If it's plural, then there is two or more subjects.

In Latin, the person and number is determined by the ending. That means there is multiple ending for each verb (yikes!). The good news is, you don't need to write pronouns (“I,” “we,” “you,” “he,” “she,” “it,” and “they”) in Latin. Hooray! 


----------


##Verb endings
These are extremely important in a Latin sentence. You ***must*** memorize these endings! (There's going to be a lot you have to remember. It sucks, but that's Latin for you!) 

|  Person   | Singular | Plural ||
|-----|:--------:|:------:|
| 1st |    o/m   |   mus  |
| 2nd |     s    |   tis  |
| 3rd |     t    |   nt   |
|     |          |        | 

##Rules
(Ugh. I hate rules too. You just have to remember these will translating and writing Latin)

Every Latin verb has 4 principal parts. They are all used for different puposes. For now, we'll mostly use the first and second principal parts.

The endings we have learned above are added onto the stem of the verb. You find the stem by cutting off the -re off the second principle part.

Example: Narro, narrare, narravi, narratum – tell, narrate

narrare
narra~~re~~
narra

Once you find the stem, add the different endings onto it.

Exception: When in the first singular, do not use the stem. Just take the first principal part, and leave it as is.
				
Ex. You might expect the first person singular of narro to be narrao, as the stem is narra. Instead, it is simply narro.

##Forms of Narro, with translations

|  Person   |   Singular   |  Plural  |
|-----|:------------:|:--------:|
| 1st | Narro/Narram (I tell)| Narramus (We tell)|
| 2nd | Narras  (You tell)     | Narratis (You (plural) tell)|
| 3rd | Narrat  (he/she/it tells)     | Narrant (they tell) |
|     |              |          | 

##Tense
Tense is when an action is happening. There are many different tenses for verbs.

 For now, we only use the present tense in Latin. 
 The present tense can be translated many different ways. There is the simple present (I love). You can also add words like am, is, are, do, and does (I am loving, you are loving, I do love, he does love) without changing the meaning.
 
Do not add words like was or will, as they will change the meaning.

That's it for now! Please leave comments if you have any questions/suggestions!
